---
author: shantanunarale
title: 2-Files
date: 2024-01-12 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Advanced Programming]
tags: [File Handling, File]
---

In Python, to open a file we have open function. The open function takes in the path of the file and the mode in which the file needs to be opened. The default mode is read mode. It returns *TextIOWrapper* object. The *TextIOWrapper* supports various methods like read and write to perform file operations. 

```python
f = open("testfile.txt", "r")

print(f.read())
f.close()

f = open("testfile.txt", "r")

print(f.read())
f.close()

# Output: This is my Test File. 
# Output:  My Name is Shantanu
# Output:  I am a Software Engineer
# Output:  I live in Pune
```

The default mode in which the file can be opened is read mode. So even if you dont pass *r* to the open function file still opens in read mode. Once you open the file, the file also needs to be closed using `close()` method. So all the file operations should be within *open* and *close* blocks.

To simplify the syntax of opening and closing the file, Python also supports context manager. The syntax is as follows.

```python
with open("testfile.txt") as f:
    print(f.read())

# Output: This is my Test File. 
# Output:  My Name is Shantanu
# Output:  I am a Software Engineer
# Output:  I live in Pune
```
In this example, you do not need to explicitly close the file connection. The keyword `with` takes care of the same. the return value of open is stored in the variable *f*. The read method reads the entire file, however, you can also use `readline()` method to read the file line by line as below.

```python
with open("testfile.txt") as f:
    # print(f.read())
    print(f.readline())
    print(f.readline())
    print(f.readline())
    print(f.readline())
    print(f.readline())

# Output: This is my Test File.
#  
# Output:  My Name is Shantanu

# Output:  I am a Software Engineer

# Output:  I live in Pune
```

Note that here we are getting an extra linefeed which is due to print statement. The `readline()` by default is reading line till the linefeed character. This method also accepts an int as an input and will return only those many characters. To read all the lines at once, use `readlines()` method as below.

```python
with open("testfile.txt") as fl:
    lst = fl.readlines()
    print(lst)

#Output : ['This is my Test File. \n', 'My Name is Shantanu\n', 'I am a Software Engineer\n', 'I live in Pune']
```

Please note, how the *\n* character is coming at the end of each line. You can use `strip()` method to remove leading and trailing spaces. The file can also be opened in different modes apart from *r*. Here are few more file opening modes.

- r mode : Opens the file as read only.
- w mode : Opens the file for writing, creates new file if file does not exist and overwrites existing file.
- a mode : Used for appending the file.
- r+ mode : Use for read and write

Using *r+* mode you can read as well as write at the same time. The problem is when we write, the write function starts writing from the point where the cursor position is. In file handling, the cursor position corresponds to every read/write operation we perform. As we perform read/write, the cursor position of a file will advance. To check and reset the cursor positions, we have `tell()` and `seek()` methods.

The `tell()` method tells the current cursor position of the file which is an integer number starting 0 and seek can reset the position to given cursor position. Below is one of the example.

```python
with open("Testfile.txt", "r+") as fx:
    print(fx.readline())
    print(fx.readline())
    print(fx.tell())
    fx.seek(44)
    # print(fx.readline())
    print(fx.write("I am here.\n"))
```

This inserts the line at position 44. You can also iterate directly on the file object *TextIOWrapper* returned by open function as below. This prints file line by line.

```python
with open("testfile.txt", "r") as f:
    for ln in f:
        print(ln)
```