---
author: shantanunarale
title: 18-Sets
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [set, built-in types, core types]
---

Set is a mutable data type available in python. A set is essentially a collection of unique elements. There are few things unique about set. Below is how a basic set looks like in python

```python
st = {1, 2, 3, 4}
```

1. Blank Set cannot be created by using {}, this creates a dictionary. To create a blank set need to use set() function.
2. Set is not a subscriptable object, meaning, you cannot use indexes like `st[0]` to accecss an element of a set like you can for list or dict. However, set is iterable and can be used in for loop.
3. Set cannot contain a mutable data type like list, dict or another set in it. Only immutable types can be part of set.
4. Set are very fast for data retrival as compared to list. The only major use case of a set(apart from mathematical applications) is to find if any value exists in it (kind of a lookup operation).
5. In order to get unique elements of list or tuple, just convert it to set using set() function and convert to original type.

### Methods supported on set

- add() : This method is used to add element to a set, if element exists, nothing happens.
- remove() : removes element from set, if element not found, returns KeyError.
- union() : returns union of two sets. Short hand |
- intersect() : returns intersection of two sets. Short hand &.
- difference() : returns difference of two sets. Short hand -.
- symetric_difference() : returns symetric difference. Shorthand ^.
```python
s1 = {1, 2, 3}
s2 = {1, 2, 4}
s3 = s1 ^ s2
print(s3)
# Result : {3, 4}
```
- issubset() : check if set is subset of given set. Short hand <
- issuperset() : check if set is superset of given set. Short hand \>.
- difference_update & symetric_difference_update: update a given set with difference or symettric difference.