---
author: shantanunarale
title: 15-While Loops
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [loop, while]
---

While is the most basic mechanism of looping in programming. Under the hood, a for loop is also implemented through a while loop. Unlike a for loop where you suggest number of times a loop should be executed either by using range function or iterable, in while a loop is executed till the condition of while loop is met.

```python
# Basic while loop
i = 0
while i < 10:
    print(i, end=" ") 
    i += 1
# Result : 0 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9
```
As you can see in the above example, while loop continues to execute till the condition i < 10 is evaluated to True. It doesn't matter how many times the loop is executed, if line `i += 1` is removed from the program, the while loop can continue to execute for infinite number of times. Also, the while loop doesn't care about incrementing i, it has to be taken care by user.

It is not necessary to supply a condition like above to while loop. A while loop can also run indefinitely as below.

```python
# While loop with break

while True:
    num = input("Enter a value number: ")
    if num.isdigit():
        break
```

A while loop needs a condition that evaluates to True in order to enter the loop and keep on iterating, as shown above, the loop would continue to iterate till user enters a valid number **i.e. till isdigit() function evaluate to True and we hit break**. The same keywords *continue*, *break* and *pass* are also supported by while loop.

### While loop to iterate list

A while loop can also be used to iterate a list and can be substitued for a for loop like below.

```python
# While loop to iterate list

lst = [1, 2, 3.4, True, False, 'Shantanu']
idx = 0

while idx < len(lst):
    print(lst[idx], end="")
    idx += 1
```
The user, needs to manually take care of the index and make sure that it does not gets passed the lenght of the list to avoid errors.

### While Else

While else is similar to for else. The else part of the while loop is executed only if the while loop completes the iteration and the break keywors is not encountered. If the break is encountered, else is also skipped.

```python
# While Else loop

s = "Hello World!"
idx = 0

while idx < len(s):
    if s[idx] == "l":
        print("Contains l")
        break
    idx += 1
else:
    print("not Contains l")

# Result : Contains l
```

