---
author: shantanunarale
title: 20-Functions
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [function, functional]
---

Python supports the construct of global functions as opposed to C# which does not support global functions. Functions are different from methods. A method is defined in a class and can be accessed from the object and acts on the object. A function is a piece of code that can be called upon and executed anywhere. Example of built in functions in python are len, print, input, chr, ord etc. Basic definition of a function is as follows.

```python
def fn_name(params):
    return # Optional
 
 # Mainline code
 fn_name()
 ```

 return keyword is optional. As soon as return is encountered, function returns control to the calling application and all the lines after return are discarded, so return should be the last line in the function. Few important things about function.

 - Function should be declared ahead of the mainline code, since, functions declared after mainline code will not be interpreted.
 - Python supports concept of a function within function, so we can have a function within a function which can be accessed inside the function block only.
 - A function can have none, one or more than one return blocks but return can return only one value.
 - If you wish to return multiple values, you can use tuple type and decompose the tuple as below.
 ```python
 def fun_add_sub(x, y):
    sm = x + y
    df = x - y
    return sm, df # this is same as (sm, df) as it defines a tuple.

# Mainline code
s, d = fun_add_sub(10, 5)
print(f"Sum is {s} and diff is {d}")

# Result : Sum is 15 and diff is 5
```
- You can add a default value of a parameter and that parameter becomes optiona, however, all the parameters with default value should come after the mandatory parameters in the function definition.
- There are two ways to call a function, one by passing positional arguments, other by passing key word argument. Key word argument is when you name the argument. In this case, the order of argument is not required to same as in function definition.

```python
 def fun_add_sub(x, y):
    sm = x + y
    df = x - y
    return sm, df # this is same as (sm, df) as it defines a tuple.

# Mainline code
s, d = fun_add_sub(y = 5, x = 10) # Keyword arg
s, d = fun_add_sub(10, 5) # Positional arg
print(f"Sum is {s} and diff is {d}")

# Result : Sum is 15 and diff is 5
```