---
author: shantanunarale
title: 19-Errors
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [exception, raise, error, except]
---

There are two types of errors.
1. Compile time errors.
2. Run Time Errors.

Compile time errors are basically those, that cannot let program run since compilation itself fails example is syntax error. These type of errors are usually caught by IDEs during compilation.

Runtime errors are those, that happen during the runtime, example being, invalid input passed by user. These errors occur during runtime and can cause program to close abrubptly.

Python like all the other languages, provides a robust mechanism of handling these errors through `try except` block. Below is the most basic form of a try except block in python.

```python
try:
    x = [1, 2, 3]
    print(x[3])
except:
    print("Error occured")

# Result : Error occured
```

In the above example, we have a list of 3 elements (starting index : 0 and last index : 2). We are trying to access an element at position 3 that does not exist and hence would throw an IndexError. The block code which is susceptible to errors and needs error handling should be enclosed in a try block. Whenever, any error occurs in any of the line control is transferred to except block. In the except, we are only printing, Error occured. In a real scenario, we can need to handle this error.

In the above example, we are not able to understand what error has occured. The fix is as below.

```python
try:
    x = [1, 2, 3]
    print(x[3])
except Exception as e:
    print(f"Error occured - {e}")

```
By using, `Exception` class, we can catch all types of exception and print the error on the screen.
> Exception is a base class for all the Error class in Python.

However, the problem is we are catching all the types of errors. This is a bad practise and besides we only need to handle certain of errors (ex: IndexError and ZeroDivisionError). To fix this.

```python
try:
    x = [1, 2, 3]
    print(x[3])
except IndexError as e:
    print(f"Index Error occured - {e}")
except ZeroDivisionError as e:
    print(f"Zero Div Error occured - {e}")
finally:
    print("Done")
```
In the above example, we have used two except blocks. Based on the type of error, the control will either transfer to IndexError block or ZeroDivisionError block and only, these two errors are handled. If there is other type of error, the program shall terminate abruptly.


> There can be endless number of except blocks but atleast one must be there.


In the above example, we also have a finally block. This block is executed at the end irrespective of wether program enters except block or not, the finally block shall be executed.

In case, if same action needs to be performed for more than one error, you can also write the code as below. Here we are trying to capture multiple errors in one except block.

```python
try:
    x = [1, 2, 3]
    print(x[3])
except (IndexError, ZeroDivisionError) as e:
    print(f"Index/Zero Div. Error occured - {e}")
finally:
    print("Done")
```

### Raising an error

There is also a mechanism in python to raise an exception at any point in the code. This is done using `raise` keyword.

```python
# raising an error

try:
    raise Exception("Custm Exception")
except Exception as e:
    print("Error", e)

```