---
author: shantanunarale
title: 11-List
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [built-in type, core python type, list]
---

List is a collection that is available in python. A List can store multiple elements of different type. Example of a list

```python
x = [1, 2, 3.5, True, "Hello", None]
y = [[1, 2], 3, True] # List can also store another list.
```
All the elements in the list are indexed. So to access an element in the List, you can pass the index of the element. Python supports both positive and negative indexing as below.

```python
x = [1, 2, 3.5, True, "Hello", None]
print(x[0]) # Output 1
print(x[-1]) # Output None

'''
Indexing in the list starts as 0, python also supports negative indexing
1   2   3.5   True "Hello" "World"
0   1    2     3     4        5    --> Positive Indexing
-6 -5   -4    -3    -2       -1    --> Negative Indexing
'''
```

The element are zero indexed that means the first element in the list is at index zero, similarly, the last element in the list is at -1 index. To access the list in forward manner you can start from 0 and to access in reverese, start at -1. 

You can also convert any value to list using list() function as below.

`x = list("Shantanu")`

> You can also use the indexing on other collections like string, however, other methods like pop remove do not work on str.

Lists also supports LEN function. LEN function gives the length of the list as below.

```Python
lst = [1, 2, 3.5, False]
print(len(lst)) # Output is 4
```
> In Python, there are some global functions like list(), str(), print(), input(), len() etc. These are functions. Apart from that, pythong also supports methods like any other Object oriented Programming language.

Below are some of the methods of List.

- pop() : This method returns and removes the last element in the list by default. You can also provide index position and element at specific position is returned as well as removed from the list. If the index does not exist, error is thrown out. Similarly, if the list is empty, pop throws an error.
- count() : Counts occurrence of a specific element in the list. If the element does not exist, it returns zero.
- index() : This method returns the index of the first occurrence of an element passed to the method. If the elemenet does not exist, this method returns an error.
- remove() : This method, removes the first occurence of the element in the list, if the element does not exist, it returns error.
- append() : This method appends any object or another list to the end of the list.
- extend() : This method extends the list from any itterable. You can also use + operator to extend another list.

> append and extend methods looks like doing the same job but they are fundamentally different when you append list to a list as described in below example. Extend method is opening the collection and appending individual value of the list the another one.
```Python
lst = [1, 2, 3]
lst2 = [4, 5]
lst3 = lst.append(lst2)
# lst3 = [1, 2, 3, [4, 5]]
lst = [1, 2, 3]
lst4 = lst.extend(lst2)
# lst4 = [1, 2, 3, 4, 5]
```

Similar to count, you can also use the in operator in Python as below.

```Python
x = [1, 2, 3]
if 1 in x: # Alternative syntax : x.count(1) > 1
    print("Yes")
else:
    print("No")
```