---
author: shantanunarale
title: 21-Mutability
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [mutable, immutable]
pin: true
---

Word mutate means change. Mutability in programming refers to ability of datatype to change the value at runtime. In Python, there are two different types.

- Mutable dataypes
- Immutable datatypes

Immutable datatypes are those who cannot change the value in place after the initial assignment. The examples of immutable data types are.

- int
- float
- bool
- None
- str
- tuple

On the contrary the mutable datatypes are those that can do inplace modifications after they are initialized. Examples are

- list
- set
- dictionary

> One thing to notice here is mutable types supports methods that can do inplace modification of the object like list supports sort, pop and remove methods. While tuple does not support any of these methods.

In order to check the memory address of the variable python has **id()** function. This function returns the memory address of the variable example.

```python
x = 5
print(id(x))

#Output : 140721155265480
# Returns an int which is memory address.
```

Using id function we can check if the type is mutable or immutable. In the below example, we have two variables imm holding int and mut holding a list.

```python
# Basic example of immutable and mutable types

imm = 6 # Immutable int type
mut = [6, 7] # Mutable data type

print(id(imm), id(mut))
# Output: 140721155265480 2300175464896

imm += 1
mut.append(8)

print(id(imm), id(mut))
# Output: 140721155265512 2300175464896

```
As you can see, the first time we print the ids we get two different ids for imm and mut variables. When we increment the imm variable by 1 and append the list and print the ids again, the id of the imm has changed but that of the list is same. This is because since list is mutable it allows inplace modifications as opposed to int. Even an operation like incrementing an int, python allocates new memory location and assigns variable x to new memory location.

> The old value is eventually cleared by garbage collector.

Python also supports is keyword that we can check if the two variables point to same object. The syntax is as below.

```python

# Using is keyword.

x = 1
y  = x

z = [1, 2]
w = z

print(x is y, z is w)
# Output : True True
```
In the above example, we created two variables of type int and list and used another variable y and w to hold x and z respectively. In the backend, w and z point to the same object and hence the `z is w` would return True. In case of x and y initially since neither x and y are modified both variables are assigned to same object and hence the result would be True. If we happen to modify either x or y, the next time we run `x is y` this would return us False as shown below.

```python
x = 0
w.append(3)
print(x is y, z is w)
# Output : False True
print(x, y, w, z)
# Output : 0 1 [1, 2, 3] [1, 2, 3]
```
As you can see, now x and y both hold different objects y keeps on pointing to the original object with value 1 and x is now pointing to new object with value 0. In case of list, since z and w are also pointing to the same list modifying either z or w affects both as they are mutable types.

Python also has an optimization, when we have a same value assigned to two variables those are really small numbers like 1, 2 etc python in the backed points both the variables to same memory location. For example

```python
a = int(input("Enter an int: "))
b = int(input("Enter an int: "))

print(id(a), id(b), a is b)
# Output
# Enter an int: 1
# Enter an int: 1
# 140721155265320 140721155265320 True

a += 1
print(id(a), id(b), a is b)
#Output: 140721155265352 140721155265320 False
```

Here both a and b are holding an integer value 1 and hence python allocates same memory location leading to more efficient program execution, however, changing either a or b would cause both variables to point at different memory locations.

Mutablity plays an important role when passing parameters to functions. Since, based on what type of parameter you pass and the operation you do in the function may introduce some side effects.

```python
# Mutability with functions

def immutable_fn(x: int):
    x += 1
    print(x)

def mutable_fn(y: list):
    y.append(1)
    print(y)

x = 1
print(x)
immutable_fn(x)
print(x)
# Output: 
# 1 
# 2 print in the function
# 1

z = [-1, 0]
print(z)
mutable_fn(z)
print(z)
# Output:
# [-1, 0]
# [-1, 0, 1] print in the function
# [-1, 0, 1]
```

The function immutable_fn expects an int and as you can see, the variable x inside the function increments the int but the variable x outside function is not affected cause both variables are pointing to different objects.

In case of mutable_fn that accepts list the variable z that is passed to this function both variable y and z are pointing to same object and hence the modification is done in place and the variable outside function is also affected.

> This construct is similar to pass by value and pass by reference. Mutable types are pass by reference and immutable are pass by value.

Types can also be nested like a list inside a list or tuple within a tuple. Not only this, a mutable type can hold an immutable type and vice versa.

```python
tup = (1, (1, 2))
lis = [1, [1, 2]]

tup_lis = (1, [2, 3])
lis_tup = [1, (2, 3)]

print(tup, lis, tup_lis, lis_tup)
# Output: (1, (1, 2)) [1, [1, 2]] (1, [2, 3]) [1, (2, 3)]
tup_lis[1].append(4)
print(tup_lis)
# Output: (1, [2, 3, 4])
```
if an imutable type like tuple holds a mutable type like list, the changes to the list within tuple are inplace changes.

```python
# Assigning type within type
ind_ls = [2, 3]
tup = (1, ind_ls)

print(tup[1] is ind_ls)
# Output: True

ind_ls.append(4)
print(tup[1] is ind_ls, ind_ls, tup)
# Output: True [2, 3, 4] (1, [2, 3, 4])
```

As in the preveous example, we have *ind_ls* variable that is a list and is the first element of tuple *tup*. Modifying either first element of tuple or *ind_ls* would impact both the tuple *tup* and list *ind_ls*.

As we know that assigning mutable type only assigns the another variable to same object, suppose we want to change this behaviour. Say we want to create a new list object that shold be same as the original one but should be a new object this can be done using either copy method or using slice [:] in python.

```python
# Creating new mutable object

st = {1, 2, 3, 4}
lst = [1, 2, 3, 4]
dic = {1: "One", 2: "Two", 3: "Three"}

st_cpy = st.copy() # Cannot use slice [:] on set as it is not subscriptable.
dic_cpy = dic.copy() # Cannot use slice [:] on dic.
lst_cpy = lst[:]
lst_cpy2 = lst.copy()

print(st is st_cpy) 
# Output : False
print(dic is dic_cpy)
# Output : False
print(lst is lst_cpy)
# Output : False
```

When you have a nested mutable objects then there are two types of copies you can make.

- Shallow copy
- Deep copy

Shallow copy is when we mutable type within mutable type are not copied in. .copy and slice [:] both do a shallow copy.

```python
x = [[1, 2], [3, 4]]
y = x[:]

print(x is y)
# Output : False

y[0].append(5)
print(x, y)
# Output: [[1, 2, 5], [3, 4]] [[1, 2, 5], [3, 4]]
```

In the above example, the list x and y are different objects but the element of x [1, 2] and [3, 4] are same as of y. So modifying elements withing x impact the element withing y as well as this is a shallow copy.

A deep copy is when the element within x would also be copied within y.