---
author: shantanunarale
title: 22-Scope
date: 2024-01-11 00:36:00 +0530
categories: [Core Python, Programming Fundamentals]
tags: [scope, function scope]
pin: true
---

In Python, the scope has to do with from where the specific variables are accessible from. 

Variables those are defined inside of a function are not accessible outside of the function.

```Python
def foo():
    x = 1
    print(x)

foo()
print(x )
# Output: NameError as x is not in the scope.
```

However, if the x is declared outside of the function. The x would have been accessible in the code block as well.

```Python
x = 0

def foo():
    x = 1
    print(x, end=" ")

print(x, end=" ")
foo()
print(x)
# Output: 0 1 0
```
One thing to note here is that variable x is defined outside as well as inside of the function. However, the variable that is defined inside of the function is local to the function only and hence the output is 0 1 0. 

The variables defined within function are not accessible outside of the functions. Also, if a variable defined outside block of function has same name as the variable within the function, local scope comes into picture as in the above case. When inside the function, python does not modify variable x that was defined outside the function. Same would be the case for function parameter as well.

```python
def func(y):
    y += 1
    print(y, end=" ")

y = 0
func(y)
print(y)
# Output: 1 0
```
This changes a bit when we pass the mutable parameter like list to the function as shown below.

```python
# Function Scope for mutable types
def mut_func(z):
    z.append(4)
    print(z)

z = [1, 2, 3]
mut_func(z)
print(z)
# Output: [1, 2, 3, 4]
#[1, 2, 3, 4]
```

If at all, the variable declared outside (aka global scope) needs to be modified within a function we can use global keyword. **However, usage of global keyword is regarded as a bad practise and should be avoided as it can introduce undesirable side effects.**

```python
abc = 0
def func_mod():
    global abc
    abc = 123
    print(abc)

func_mod()
# Output: 123
```

> One thing to note is if the variable with same name does not exists within function and the global variable only needs to be read, we can directly use it without using global keyword.

In Python, unlike in other languages variables defined within block of code are also accessible outside that block.

```python

# Block Scope

inp = int(input("Enter a number: "))

if inp > 0:
    val = "Positive Integer"

print(val)
# Output: Enter a number: 1
# Positive Integer
```

However, note that if the input provided by user in the above example is -1, we get NameError as the if block is not executed. In compiled languages like C#, this behaviour is usually caught at the compile, however, Python allows this program to run. The best practise is to define the variables at the beginning.

```python

# Block Scope
val = ""
inp = int(input("Enter a number: "))

if inp > 0:
    val = "Positive Integer"

print(val)
# Output: Enter a number: 1
# Positive Integer
```